# Tyler

The name of this project is a play on 'tiler', in that it requires that you load a bunch of tilable images into it. Also vaguely the awesome chaos of Tyler Durden (from Fight Club).

This is a project that I started a long time ago, probably in 1999 or something.. it began from trying to implement a simple neural-net for a Cognitive Science assignment at Adelaide University. I didn't get very far past a very-prototype phase with the neural-net but learnt a lot about Java! For me that unlocked some 2d-image-pixel powers and flexibilities that eventually made Tyler happen.

The main idea that I think is interesting about this whole engine, is how it explores the idea of a pixel (or particle) having a 'neighborhood' or set of input pixels or values. Both pixels and particles can be set to update their state by sampling their neighborhood (and 'rule' data) then following some function as to what to do with that information. It's an idea that is implemented, partially explored, but not yet exhaustively well developed in Tyler.

On the pixel side, a simple list-of-neighbours format (which is called 'Topology') supports two seemingly disparate types of image processing, 1), warping (or ~advection) and 2), filtering (like blur/sharpen/edge-detect/game-of-life/reaction-diffusion [1]): 

1) A two-dimensional warp-field such as randomized 2d sine-waves, or warps generated by fractal functions (interestingly, these produce fractals when run in feedback), noise or radial/metaball twist-radial-warp functions. With these generators, the idea is that multiple neighbours are only used to increase the sampling fidelity (anti-aliasing), not to cater for any intentional focal/detail-size (or sharpness) shift.

2) Multi-neighbour neighborhoods, intended to be fed into 'filter'-like processes. Essentially, you could think of these as working in frequency-space or as forming a spatially-defined algorithm such as blurring/sharpening, or diffusing. Simple examples are the 'Von-Neumann neighborhood' (shaped like a plus, all the edge-neighbors in a grid network) or 'Moore neighborhood' (N/NE/E/SE/S/SW/W/NW, all vertex-neighbors).

These days (2019 eh) I'm still interested in this model of processing and I'm thinking that if I were to add to it a 'weight' or float value per-neighbour (where each neighbour was just an integer index previously), that might potentially make the output much more presentable (ie, properly filtered). Perhaps even adding a couple of floats (real and imaginary), and then treating the weights as complex, would be interesting too!

I'd also like to explore out towards near-neuralnet levels of connectivity in terms of numbers of neighbours. Under that scheme a pixel can potentially be connected to all other pixels, at a given weight (or complex-weight).. which sounds to me like it could be used to make an image that is able to make changes to itself (for a given rule) in space, in frequency-space and even in arbitrarily-connected-network-space (whatever that's actually called). Sounds to me like it might be difficult-to-explore, but fun!

I've always been a massive fan of the demoscene (and realtime-graphics generally: [2]) and some of the ideas in Tyler are intended to be realtime effects such that you might use for fairly tight control-synchronisation in a VJing or demo-engine scenario. That is one reason why the filtering strategy is low-fi, but fast!. I did a couple of VJing gigs using Tyler a good while ago, but obviously that didn't turn into a profession.

How to build tyler? What I most often do is go into the src folder and do 'javac *.java', seems to work. If you want to use some IDE like netbeans/eclipse, it should be easy enough to import I think. That might put the built classes somewhere else, in which case you might need to make sure tyler can still find its config file and tile images.

To run tyler, you should be able to use the the command: 'java tyler' from the build directory. You might need to make sure at least the '.tylerConfig' file is in the same directory as the class files. Inside it can point to any tile images you like.

So, what can we do with Tyler? (for fun or experimentation?!)

* Tab or Right-click menu to access pretty much all actions, help (in the 'Globalz') and heaps of hotkeys, eg. hold Ctrl+Alt+Shift to move the menu around.
* Full capture of 'vector' particles and UI components rendering into the pixel-automata realm (can be disabled for speed too).
* 2D Particles emitted from the mouse pointer, with intricate ways to control their size/motion/draw-method and color evolution/alpha blending.
* Realtime pixel-feedback engine with various interesting ways to generate a warp or neighborhood for the feedback, including various fractals, noise, sines and an 11x11 drawable boolean-matrix-based neighborhood generator.
* Complex (too complex? mostly useless) color/LUT-based transformation/color blending methods for advancing the pixel-automata iterations with. More recently some of these are threaded too for better framerates.
* The idea of extracting a LUT from the image using a 'Tool' (thay samples along a line using a default 'extractor channel' (for example Luminance or Hue)) and being able to then also edit and smooth the LUT values and use them in other parts of tyler (such as the pixel-neighbourhood-transfer-function and the particle color blend methods).

It's basically a particles and pixels playground, and I still think it's a fun thing to tinker with! : )

Anyone interested in adapting this code to run on Android and make it into a fast (glsl) fun pixel playground, or just to port it as-is in all its software-rendering-glory please contact me: gdanzo at gmail.com


[1] Exact 'Game of Life' dynamics probably isn't easy to come by in Tyler, and neither is the behaviour of any specific reaction-diffusion system, but I think in principle both should be possible, and obviously trivially easy if you made source changes to directly support them in the engine.

[2] Do yourself a favour and watch some recent DemoScene Demos (from a recent platform such as windows). Groups to look for (amongst many more): CNCD, Fairlight, Orange, Kewlers, MFX, Conspiracy, Farbrausch, Quite, Satori, ASD.
